# Convolutional Neural Network based Thalamic Nuclei Segmentation for MPRAGE images
Thalamic nuclei have been implicated in several neurological diseases. Thalamic nuclei parcellation from structural MRI is challenging due to poor intra-thalamic nuclear contrast while methods based on diffusion and functional MRI are affected by limited spatial resolution and image distortion. 
Existing multi-atlas based techniques are often computationally intensive and time-consuming. 
In this work, we propose a 3D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based framework for thalamic nuclei parcellation using T1-weighted Magnetization Prepared Rapid Gradient Echo (MPRAGE) images. Transformation of images to an efficient representation has been proposed to improve the performance of subsequent classification tasks especially when working with limited labeled data. We investigate this by transforming the MPRAGE images to White-Matter-nulled MPRAGE (WMn-MPRAGE) contrast, previously shown to exhibit good intra-thalamic nuclear contrast, prior to the segmentation step.

We trained two 3D segmentation frameworks using MPRAGE images (n=35 subjects): a) a native contrast segmentation (NCS) on MPRAGE images and b) a synthesized contrast segmentation (SCS) where synthesized WMn-MPRAGE representation generated by a contrast synthesis CNN were used. Thalamic nuclei labels were generated using THOMAS, a multi-atlas segmentation technique proposed for WMn-MPRAGE images. 

If you use this in your work, please cite the following article:

Umapathy, L., Keerthivasan, M.B., Zahr, N.M. et al. Convolutional Neural Network Based Frameworks for Fast Automatic Segmentation of Thalamic Nuclei from Native and Synthesized Contrast Structural MRI. Neuroinform (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12021-021-09544-5
[Full text](https://rdcu.be/czd6S)

For more details:
Corresponding author: Dr. Saranathan [Email](manojsar@radiology.arizona.edu)


### Remarks: RESEARCH USE ONLY, NOT APPROVED FOR CLINICAL USE
THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
